# Auto-Evo

Auto-Evo is not a single algorithm, but a longstanding problem at the center of
thrive. The goal of Auto-Evo is for Thrive to be able to generate new creatures
to populate the world through the evolutionary process in real time. This
problem comes with a few constraints. As already mentioned, Auto-Evo must be
able to run in real time on all of our player's PCs. Additionally, Auto-Evo must
generate creatures that have sufficient variety to provide an interesting
experience for the player, while still sticking to expectations of a viable
creature.

## The Miche Algorithm
While Auto-Evo is not in itself an algorithm, it is solved by one. The current
algorithm used to solve Auto-Evo is the Miche Algorithm.

### Miche
The term Miche comes from a shortening of Multi-Niche (and a nod to computer
science professor Dr. Meesh.) Each Miche is a node in a tree structure called
the Miche Tree. Each of these Miches contains a list of child Miches,
recursively creating the tree. If a node does not contain any child nodes it is
known as a Leaf Miche, and instead contains a Species known as the Occupant.
Every Miche additionally contains a Selection Pressure further explained below.

### Selection Pressure
A Selection Pressure is a function that provides a fitness score to a species.
Selection Pressures measure fitness in a specific attribute, eg, being able to
osmoregulate or the ability to find food. Fitness Scores are arbitrary and
specific to each pressure (With the exception that a score <= 0 means a pressure
has been failed.) Therefore scores are always compared relative to another
species via WeightedComparedScores. Each selection pressure contains a list of
Mutation Strategies that are applied to try and increase the Pressure's score in
the mutations.

### Mutation Strategies
A Mutation Strategy is a function that creates new mutated species from a parent
species. Strategies are often very specific, eg add an organelle that produces
ATP from iron or remove an organelle that consumes glucose. These allow Auto-Evo
to only attempt to generate and try a specific subset of the possible mutations
that are each much more likely to be an improvement on the parent. Each Mutation
Strategy also has an MP cost to limit the amount of mutations per generation.

### Steps
Each time Auto-Evo is run it goes through a series of steps.

#### Generate Miche Step
At the start of each Auto-Evo run the Miche Tree is dynamically generated for
each Patch. Currently each Miche Tree is generated by adding branches for each
energy source present in the Patch (Including the species themselves to support
predation.) This should be expanded to be much more dynamic in the future.

#### Insert Step
After the Miche Tree is generated, all of the species present in the patch are
inserted one by one into the top of the tree. First the species gets a score
from the Root Miche's Selection Pressure. If it failed the pressure (score <= 0)
it is pruned and does not continue down that branch. Otherwise it continues down
the tree recursively, going to each child of the Miche and repeating the
process. If a species reaches a leaf node without being pruned its scores on
each Selection Pressure are compared relative to the Leaf Miche's current
occupant. If with the weighted average the new species has a higher fitness than
the occupant or there is no current occupant the new species becomes that Leaf
Miches new occupant.

#### Mutate Step
After all of the species are inserted into the tree, a list of occupants from
the leaf nodes in the tree is generated. For each occupant the transversal (list
of Miches) between the occupant's Leaf Miche and the Root Miche is gone through,
creating a list of all those Miche's Selection Pressures. All of the Mutation
Strategy from the Each Mutation Strategy is repeatably applied (until the
species runs out of MP) to generate a set of new mutated creatures. After all
occupants have been mutated, a set of the best performing creatures from all of
the occupants are inserted into Miche Tree just like in the Insert Step. Any
mutation that occupy a Leaf Miche by time all mutations are inserted are added
to the patch as a new species. Any species that no longer occupy any Leaf Miche
are marked as extinct from the patch (An exception to this is the player who
just needs enough energy to survive.)
